---
layout: post
title: How do fraternities and sororities work?
author:
  display_name: rmichnovicz
  first_name: Randal
  last_name: Michnovicz

tags:
    - Greek Life
---

I was clueless as to what to expect out of Georgia Tech Greek life, so after a
bit more than a semester here, these are my observations.

Check out Tech's official
[Guide To Greek Life](http://greek.gatech.edu/uploads/files/2016GuidetoGreekLife%281%29.pdf)
for info about social fraternities and sororities. Also see their official
[grade and membership reports](http://greek.gatech.edu/content/4/grade-membership-reports).

There's a lot of selective organizations with Greek letters at most colleges,
and Georgia Tech is no exception! There's 4 types of organizations I am
referring to here: social fraternities/sororities, social
fraternities/sororities, professional fraternities, and honors societies.
The social ones that are managed by the Office of Greek Affairs, and the rest
are basically clubs. I'll go over non-social Greek lettered orgs first, then
talk about the social ones. While the word fraternity can mean either co-ed or
male only, sororities are exclusive to women.

Professional fraternties and organizations (all co-ed) are typically for forming
connections and often skills. There are all sorts of organizations, from just
general professional interests, to ones for industry fields, to
ethnic/racial-interest clubs.

Service organizations exist at all schools, but service fraternities are
notable for being tight-knit groups bonded together over service. Alpha Phi
Omega is a co-ed fraternity, and Omega Phi Alpha is a service sorority.

Social fraternities and sororities exist to create deep and long-lasting friendships. These organizations are a big deal at Georgia Tech:
25% of undergraduates are a member of one! Every one of these groups is a member of one umbrella council: Interfraternity Council (IFC) (32 fraternities), Collegiate
Panhellenic Council (CPC) (8 sororities + 2 associate chapters with separate
recruitment from the rest), Multicultural Greek Council (4 cultural interest
fraternities + 3 sororities), and National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)
(4 historically black fraternities + 4 sororities).

Interfraternity Council fraternities are what people think of when one mentions
frats. Despite their often large houses, Tech's frats are typically small to
mid-sized. Most of the IFC frats have on-campus houses, although I know Sigma Pi
and Phi Kappa Sigma have off-campus housing and Triangle does not have a house.
Many students enjoy living with their friends in fraternity housing, which tends
to be very cheap and fun. Many fraternities have 2/day, 5/week meal plans with
meals cooked in the larger houses' industrial kitchens typically by a
professional chef - students report choosing to be on a meal plan is "super
worth" and "so much better than dining hall food." Although Tech's frats
tend to be much more mellow and academic than a typical public school's, they
vary widely in cultures. Many of the smaller ones are super chill or unexciting,
depending on your perspective; some of them are more focused on
athleticism, gaming, or parties. To widely varying extents, all participate in
community service, leadership on campus, athletic competitions, social
activities, and alumni interactions. The majority of IFC brothers are white and
more wealthy than average, but some frats are more diverse than others. It's
also notable that Psi Upsilon is co-ed.

Fraternities tend to have dues of around a thousand dollars a semester, or more
for frats that do more. A little of that always goes to the school, some goes
to the national fraternities since the alumni connections are important, some
goes towards house maintenance, and a lot goes to all of the activities that
brothers participate in. Fraternities have all kinds of events such as nights
out bowling/arcading/clubbing/whatever, mixers with sororities, campouts, hosted
parties, tailgates, and formal dances. Of course, the most important part of
these organizations is to spend enormous amounts of times with your best
friends, forming deep friendships.

IFC Rush is 6 nights (4 in the Spring) where rushees can walk between
fraternities, eating their free food (they all have free food) and meet
brothers. Although it can get long, it's all pretty casual: guys mostly wear
nice/fratty clothes like polos and flat front shorts, and then rushees and
brothers make small about their interests and activities. Good things to talk
about include your passions, the person you're talking to's passions, how you
like the idea of brotherhood/deep friendships, and
asking about what the fraternity and pledging are like. There isn't much of
a reason not to rush; it's a good opportunity to meet and get advice from older
undergrads. After spending a few nights at a frat, fraternities will choose some
of the rushees to give bids to - i.e. invitations to join. If you accept a bid,
you typically start some sort of initiation process, usually called pledging.
Although these processes vary in length and involvement, they often take at
least two and a half months, involve meeting the brothers, learning about
the history and rules of the frat, doing philanthropy projects, and helping out
with chores. Other initiation activities might range from fun challenges to
borderline hazing, depending on the fraternity. Although hazing breaks rules in
every layer of bureaucracy that exists in education, some of the stuff that the
more stereotypical frats make their pledges do is not nice at all. During this
process, pledges may be removed if a consensus of brothers decides to do so.
Finally, I know ZBT doesn't have pledging, and SAE might not either.

I don't know a ton about sororities, so hopefully, someone can add. There are 8
main sororities on campus that do participate in CPC rush plus two others,
Alpha Delta Chi, a Chrisitan sorority with a small but cute house and Alpha
Omega Epsilon, a sorority that both professional and social and requires its
members to be science or engineering majors. All of the sororities are very
large except for Kappa Alpha Theta, which is very new. Although the houses have
low sister to room ratios so that only upperclassmen can usually get housing,
the sororities do not throw parties at the houses like frats do.

I know CPC rush involves 3 days and a night of rushing sororities. Instead of going
frat to frat at will like in IFC, rush is highly structured, involving
recommendation letters, and going between sororities as a group. Only about
half of the rushees that have spent $80 - $90 to participate typically get bids.
Pledging/initiation tends to be less involved than the fraternities'.